
*The infrared warming lights glittered ominously across the exposed green scales of the shadowy figures. They sat stiff, seated around a branded glass table - HOSPITALCORP. "Letsssssss take away their PTO," a voice in the dark whispered. "How about keeping their ssssssalary increasessss below average inflationnn," another interjected to a chorus of approving clacks. "No," a deeper voice insisted. "Let'sss call them heroessssss when they're disssappointed with usssss to dissstract them from our ssssix figure bonusessssssss." A gasp and the room fell silent. A rustle of approving nods signaled the unanimous consent of the board.*

Okay, maybe a sssslight exaggeration.

It's simple to boil the management of the past few years by hospital administration teams down to greed or evil, but it does a massive disservice to understanding why we're in this predicament – and how we can get ourselves out. Take a look at the image below...

If you're not familiar with this particular illusion, the question is simple. "Which square is darker, A or B?" If you haven't been bamboozled by this example before, the answer is that they are both the exact same shade of grey. Our brain forms ideas and concepts based on all the information it is surrounded with, in this case, depth and shadow. Your brain is given the color information but reaches the wrong conclusion. Even when you know that they are the same color, because our brain is hardwired for interpretation, we can't even force ourselves to see the truth. Such it is with the current separation between bedside and admin. Our contexts are too different to fully understand the other perspective, even if we think we know it. What ends up happening is, even if we try to understand, we all still exist in our own selfish environment surrounded by our own context (pretty normal by human standards.) The issue isn't that both nurses and administration have their own self-interests, it's the total imbalance which allows one self-interest to completely dominate the landscape.

### The nursing context.

What makes you want to be a good nurse? Why, when you walk into work, do you do a good job? If you are anything like me, there is an inherent reward associated with selfless service in your brain. That's what drives many of us into this physically and mentally taxing career.

There was one day during the particularly awful Delta strain that the two patients I took morning report on passed away. Not two hours later I had new admissions who would go on to die later that night. I watched four of my patients pass away within twelve hours and had to find some kind of resolve to come in the very next day for what was likely another difficult shift. Thanks to the amazing team I worked with, I knew I had provided the absolute best care possible. Comradery is what carried me through my most difficult shifts and allowed me to give my patients every bit of focus I had. Although many professions deal with stress, ours is a unique kind of stress where you must be committed to providing a level of personal servitude beyond what most people understand. This profession will chew you up and spit you out if you aren't mentally prepared to give what needs to be given. That is my context. I'm not ready to take on that level of mental exertion and still have to worry about my financial situation due to skyrocketing rent, housing, college loans, or food costs. That's also just from a financial perspective and doesn't even begin to cover the distress of being responsible for the life of a patient but not given an adequate environment to perform.

You may hear many nurses say something similar to, "I'm not trying to get rich; I'm just trying to do my job and make a decent living." After dealing with all we encounter, is it really that hard to understand that a place of safety and comfort is paramount to providing a high level of care? I admit, it is a self-interested perspective to want to be compensated fairly (read, more), but I don't believe it's an immoral request. So why are we constantly told our raises are unaffordable while executives get six-figure performance bonuses? The secret is buried in the research.

Via Vox -

>A paper published last year in Health Services Research by Yang Wang, who is a PhD candidate at Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, found that when hospitals have excess revenue because of higher prices paid by private insurers, they don’t end up spending that money on improving patient care, such as by hiring more nurses. Instead, most of the extra dollars went toward administrative spending and the hospital’s own surplus.

In a sense, you can't blame hospitals for following the kinds of economic incentives that are built into the system. We operate in a model where nurses are a line item on a cost sheet rather than a service to be billed for. It's not fair, and it's not equitable, but it's also not necessarily evil...it just is what it is.

The reality is that administration has the organizational power to follow their incentives with almost zero nursing input. When a nurse gets upset and quits (let's remember that the average ICU unit turnover is every two years) there is a steady stream of fresh new graduates to replace them. This ensures that hospitals just have to hit their targets and keep enough nurses satisfied (or desperate) to keep their units from falling apart. Hospitals can do this because they have the structure to do it. Nurses have no structure – and therefore, no answer.

### Architecting decentralized power.

Do you remember how hospitals scrambled to incorporate incentives (CSI, critical staffing, etc) for staff to pick up extra shifts after the mass travel exodus? If you were a hospital that didn't offer incentives, you were going to lose a massive part of your workforce to travel contracts. Nurses didn't all come together and plan this joint action, it happened organically out of opportunity and necessity.

In the same way, systems of power can be built effectively around influencing momentum, rather than directly through political action or union organization. You can visualize it like creating a path in an overgrown jungle. Would you rather take the nice path with the traveled roads or cut your way through heavy brush without knowledge of your destination? The consequence of nurses understanding the real landscape of pay, experience, and benefits at each hospital, means an actual financial incentive to prioritize the nursing experience.

During my time picking up travel contracts around North Carolina, I asked many new grads how they found their first job. The majority reported that they didn't really put much thought behind it, it just happened to be where they did clinical rotations. Does that sound competitive or healthy? I also heard from staff nurses over and over, their desire to look for different options. What usually held them back was the lingering question, "is the grass really greener on the other side?" This lack of organization is killing our profession, and it's too complicated to point fingers and play the blame game. The only thing to do is to recognize that balancing the system means we create our own power to make fully informed decisions, just as any other career does. Check out SAFER Nursing Web Tool. A Prelude. for more specific details on how we're building this system, and Roadmap: When this baby hits 88 mph... for an idea of where this is going.
As always, thankssssssss for your consssssssideration.
-J