I get creaky bones and crave Werther's Originals whenever I say, "back in my day Facebook was better because you had to have a college email." It's so true though, social media was simpler back then. I connected with my friends, shared pictures from the events of the weekend, heard about what was going on, and used it as a way to keep in touch with people. It was more common than not at the end of meeting someone new to give them your Facebook info in lieu of a cell number.
Social media was simple because it started with a simple purpose - finding connections and maintaining connections. It's not hard to imagine that with a user base in the millions and no particularly strong monetization features, Facebook needed to lean heavy into the advertising behemoth it is today. The problem is that unless you used Facebook in the past (aka, you were a college student in the late 2000's), you don't know what it could have been. I genuinely enjoyed socializing via Facebook and have more than one image that probably shouldn't exist on the internet located somewhere on Zuckerberg's private backup servers.

### Enter the Twitter-pocalypse.

I've been one of the few millennials who generally rejected modern social media as I found the social features way less engaging with the added pain of sitting through the monetization and feature bloat. The general toxicity also really ramped up once the collegiate barrier of Facebook evaporated with the general public stuffing Facebook feeds with hot takes and pictures of their cheesesteaks. Twitter was the exemplar hot-take platform which encouraged even hotter/dumber takes with complex topics either needing nine tweets to encompass or distilled down so far that all the replies were fighting about the nuance that should have been included in the first place.
Twitter isn't entirely a swamp though. One thing that Twitter is incredibly good at is raising awareness about content that isn't hosted on Twitter, such as cutting-edge medical research alerts, breaking news, and posts-from-your-favorite-content-creator. I'm not even going to spin it, it's pure schadenfreude watching a cocky billionaire scrambling to cash checks his mouth keeps writing, but it's also sad to watch vibrant communities that relied on daily exchanges of important information wring their hands over how to remain relevant.

### The sweeter dumber brother of Twitter.

Enter Mastodon, the ad-free, unmonetized social media experience. You will be sorely disappointed if you are expecting the level of polish and user experience out of Mastodon that you get from Twitter. Open source, with around three million users at its absolute peak, its development power is nowhere close to the scale of Twitter. All that aside though, it's surprisingly impressive once you get the hang of how it works, and it even includes some features that Twitter doesn't have (e.g. API access without needing a developer account.)

Our beginner's guide can be found here but, in a nutshell, Mastodon is a decentralized service. This means that individuals operate their own instances of Mastodon which can then talk to other servers in the Fediverse, an independently owned decentralized server group. That's why your Twitter handle is @imoldgregg but your Mastodon handle is @imoldgregg@safernursing.social (if you chose to sign up on our server). At first your feed may seem barren but that's because there is no rabid algorithm desperately trying to break you down into the various product categories it will then use to hock garbage on your page. Mastodon is the essence of intention. You explicitly decide what you see rather than just getting what Twitter decides you should see, and it...is...reeeefreshing.

### Why it fits our agenda so well.

A key function of the projects under development at safernursing.org, and one of our founding principles is amplify the signal, quiet the noise.
Raising awareness and communicating using modern social media is often too cluttered with distractions and toxicity. With the many voices and issues surrounding modern healthcare, it can be difficult to find information useful for guiding effective solutions. Our sponsored projects will focus on clear communication and skillful analysis to break through the noise to deliver real impactful information.

Mastodon fits perfectly in that niche. You can choose to only see your immediate server community by selecting the local tab, or you can branch out under the Federated tab and see the conversations happening all over the Fediverse. Naturally, it also has all the various tools to search trending topics, favorited posts, and DM's. Realistically many people won't be interested in switching to another social media app, and for that reason we mirror all of our posted Mastodon content to Twitter and LinkedIn via repost bots.

### There is no free lunch.

The consequence of not using Mastodon isn't apparent at first, but the reality is unless you work in marketing you may not understand the power you give someone who has money to buy your behavioral patterns. Modern social media makes the kind of money it makes because it's designed to mainly accomplish two tasks. One, analyze your behavior to target ads for the express purpose of driving traffic to a client for conversion (you spend money.) Two, use large scale information campaigns to modify your behavior or response to an idea. The fact is that nurse activity is monitored, sold, analyzed, and modified at the request of clients who have deeper pockets than you could imagine. By continuing to engage with corporate social media you continue to give corps and their clients insight into how to target you, your wishes, your worries, and your weaknesses. The best case is a hospital can get an ad for a job in front of your face, the worst case is you start to believe that the system can never change because the kind of change needed is too overwhelming – at least that's what you read.

It's important that we build communities in spaces that genuinely promote our well-being. Consider joining our space here at OLPP, at safernursing.social, and having intentional engagement with a pro-nurse, pro-people vibe. Invite your friends and let's reframe how we relate in online social spaces.
-J