You may be accustomed to thinking that in order to keep all catheters patent you need to flush hard and fast. Your mental image may be that flush blasting the small clots out, stuck tenaciously to the inside of the lumen. This seems to be how many newer nurses envision the flushing process, but it's not always accurate and may actually lead to more clotting.

You were assigned an elderly woman, Mrs. Ethel, whose condition is improving well from septic shock post CHF exacerbation. She's only getting antibiotics and labs Q8H, but the stepdown beds are full, so she'll be ICU care until something opens up. She's got one PIV left due to her fragile veins, but IV team says they'll only consider a PICC if she starts to deteriorate. Every shift you get Mrs. Ethel back, it seems that your one PIV gets harder and harder to flush or pull back. Ethel has IV tubing hooked up running normal saline constantly (which should keep the IV clear), so why do your IVs seemingly without fail, end up occluding prematurely?

### To KVO or not to KVO.

The standard protocol to prevent vessel occlusion with a venous or arterial catheter is some form of running fluid or flush. Ask most nurses and we'll tell you that a continuous running fluid generally means around 10 ml/hr. That standard 10 ml/hr is called the KVO rate. In a cardiac unit, because we are concerned with fluid balance/overload, KVO rates may be as low as 5 ml/hr or nothing. That 10 ml/hr is up for debate though as there's also evidence that 10 ml/hr or less isn't as effective as faster rates.

Via Journal of the Association for Vascular Access - 

>"Conclusions: Low TKVO rates (10 mL/h) may not clear the PIVC tip and keep the device patent. Based on our simulations, we propose a TKVO rate of at least 20 mL/h could be used in practice; however, 30–40 mL/h appears most effective across different venous flow rates and peripheral vein sizes. However, this additional fluid load must be carefully considered based on the needs of each patient."

A KVO at 30-40 ml/hr might produce better results in a lab, but realistically no one is going to run those rates as a KVO due to fluid loads. Sometimes these details can get real off in the weeds, so I think we can simplify it a bit. If a catheter isn't getting a total flowthrough rate of greater than 10 ml/hr from any/all drips going through it, you should pay closer attention to its patency. It's more prudent to use a combination of a KVO and another approach - the intermittent flush.
You'll hear the intermittent flush also referred to as the pulsative/pulsatile, or push-pause technique. The technique shown in the video below is what's classically performed but note (we'll come back to this) that this hard flush technique is performed using a CVC, not a PIV catheter, and that's an important distinction to understand. A CVC catheter is situated centrally within a large vein (usually inserted near the shoulder or neck), and a harder flush will not cause damage to that vessel.

Note: The intermittent flush has evidence to support the use of it both alone, and in combination with a KVO.

### Preventing bacterial infections.

In every journal I've seen thus far, pulsatile flow is superior to clearing out catheters, especially those with larger lumens such as CVC catheters. Those are the main culprits behind CLABSIs, and a real target for infection prevention. The main reason this happens is the turbulent flow generated by the pulsing flush has more of a scrubbing action than a constant flow. Below is a source showing data behind how culturing catheters subjected to pulsatile flushing, results in lower bacterial numbers inside the lumen.

Via Medical Devices: Evidence and Research -

>"Pulsative flushing was at least twice as effective as continuous flushing in reducing the S. aureus count. Pulsative flushing is more effective than continuous flushing in reducing the endoluminal contamination. Pulsative flushing is a simple, effective, and inexpensive technique to reduce catheter bacterial colonization."

### Reducing phlebitis in PIVs.

An important distinction with pulsatile flushing is that for larger catheters, the technique can be performed with a good amount of force and will not cause vessel deterioration. With smaller veins such as PIVs, hard flushes can actually damage the lining of the vasculature, causing clots via damage to the glycocalyx. The glycocalyx is a thin permeable membrane providing protection to the endothelial tissue of the vessel wall.

Via Journal of Intensive Care -

>"The [glycocalyx] has been shown to be a significant binding site for blood proteins, such as antithrombin III, fibroblast growth factor, and extracellular superoxide dismutase. Based on these interactions, the most important physiological role of the endothelial GCX is vascular protection via the inhibition of coagulation and leucocyte adhesion."

The recommended technique to saline lock a PIV is a few gentle push-pauses to clear the lumen, then as you are pushing a small continuous flow, clamp the IV with the small clamp on the J-loop (the tubing coming off the catheter hub) to prevent blood from refluxing back when you pop the syringe off. That clamping during a constant flush is also how to keep your CVC lines free of blood due to that same reflux effect.

### Saving PIVs for lab draws.

I didn't understand flushes in this kind of detail during my first year at the hospital I worked for, due to my patients either having arterial lines or CVCs present to draw from. If they didn't have lines, we were lucky as phlebotomy was there for sticks. Traveling to hospitals without dedicated phlebotomy teams required me to be proficient at drawing blood, and also treat IVs properly so I could use them to draw off labs in patients who were difficult sticks. By using gentle pulsatile flushes with a proper clamping technique, I've been able to maintain PIVs for much longer than in the past.

### The takeaway.

When dealing with CVCs or other large vessel catheters, fast flushes keep lines clear. When dealing with PIVs and other smaller vessel catheters, fast flushes will lead to damage and clotting. No one wants to have a tough stick (like Mrs. Ethel) for labs Q8H because the one PIV you do have is clotting due to rough treatment. 

So, treat your PIVs gently and make sure you don't feed the IV gremlins after midnight.
-J