You've had a pretty uneventful shift so far, but you notice that your urosepsis patient from the ER, Mrs. Dawson (who has been drowsy throughout the day) has had two consecutive low pressures with a MAP of 59, and 61 respectively. She's already had 3L of fluid resuscitation in the ER, so you decide to ask the team for guidance. The doc responds to your message after evaluating fluid balance, labs, and vital signs. "Go ahead and start a norepinephrine drip and let me know what dose she needs to maintain a MAP greater than 65"

You understand the rationale, as these orders are per the "Surviving Sepsis" standard. You have a peripheral IV that both flushes and returns blood in the right AC, with a KVO hooked up but not running (she's been getting Zosyn). You connect your norepinephrine into the first Y-site of the KVO line and start your drip at 2 mcg/min (around 2 ml/hr depending on the concentration your hospital pharmacy uses) .

Five minutes later you come back and her MAP is still 59. That's ok, you tell yourself, medications take a little bit to work. You start to wonder after 15 minutes when MAPs still haven't risen so you double the dose to 4 mcg/min and wait. At 25 minutes you're getting antsy, so you increase again to 6 mcg/min. Finally, after 30 minutes, you walk in to see a MAP of 94. Phew, disaster averted you sigh. Her MAP is too high so you turn the norepinephrine down to 4, and then 2 mcg/min where she finally settles out with MAPs around 65. What just happened? Call Nancy Drew, we got a mystery on our hands!

### The calculations.

Alright, fine, Nancy isn't the best at this kinda thing so I crunched some numbers myself. I used BD Alaris tubing which has a total volume of 25 ml, and a total length of 117 inches. This means that every 4.7 inches of tubing contains 1 ml of medication. The tubing also specifies that the Y-site is located 6 inches above the patient. This means that there is approximately 1.3 ml of volume between your Y-site and the start of where the IV connects to the patient. Remember, there's usually a pigtail on the actual IV catheter which also adds around 1 ml more of volume to get through.

This effect is exaggerated with low IV flow rates, and it makes sense once you see the volume calculations. The numbers show that norepinephrine running around 2 ml/hr takes at minimum 39 minutes to make it to the pigtail hub, and if we assume another 1 ml is present in the pigtail, a total of 69 minutes before it ever reaches the patient!
69 minutes!

Obviously, we all understand that drips take time to propagate to the patient when you first start, but holy crap. Most people don't do the math to realize just how long it takes at slower rates. This is precisely why when you walk into most ICU rooms, the IVs are neat, labeled, grouped/separated by type/compatibility, and Y-sites connected as close to the patient as possible. Let's call that entire previous sentence a decent summation of IV tubing best practice. I personally use a ton of 3-to-1 adapters (we called 'em turkey feet) so that I'm not adding any extra length between my drips and my patients.

### So how does this translate into practice?

There are too many scenarios to cover all the ways to think about running IVs, so the example above simply helps you understand why there are best practices. If I had this patient, I might look for a more direct port (but remember that 1 ml still in the pigtail). I could also place a new IV seeing as Mrs. Dawson may be heading in the wrong direction and needs more access. A solution I've seen is to run a 10 ml/hr KVO along with the Y-ed in pressor when it's first started so that the norepinephrine makes it to the patient faster. In the previous example we assumed that the KVO was off after giving Zosyn, so turning it back on could be an easy fix. 12 ml/hr total flow means that the original 39 minutes it would take is now cut to 6 minutes. An unrecommended way that I've seen to get around this is to turn the drip rate up to 30-40 mcg/min for 10-20 seconds to try to "prime" the distance to the patient while connected. You can see why some methods are better than others.

Note: This particular situation above happens less with really sick patients because we are using pressors at rates which end up in the patient much faster, so the volumes to consider at that point are negligible.

### A real-world example.

A few months ago, I walked into a room of a nurse who was less familiar with ICU level care, to help her solve her rollercoaster blood pressures. This was a very sick patient, and she was concerned because the patient was on three pressors and she couldn't keep their BP stable. Norepinephrine was running alongside vasopressin and epinephrine. I took a look at how she had set up her IVs and noticed that she really hadn't set up her IVs. Instead of organizing them as close to the patient as possible, there was a daisy chain of IV tubing off of a single line. The problem wasn't access (a triple-lumen CVC was present), the issue was that she wasn't accustomed to using 3-to-1 adapters to organize.

Separating the lines out and using adapters to create single-entry points for critical drips smoothed out her issues and I don't think she had near the previous issues for the rest of the night.

You can see how it gets complicated real fast. When you Y pressors into each other (especially during the first hour you've started them) every time you titrate, the flow rate changes and affects all other drips downstream. This can make an unstable patient feel even more unstable as your titrations aren't "clean." It's not wrong but it's not ideal. If you need to do it to get your drips setup fast, go for it, but plan on fixing it later when your patient is more stable.

The same concept can be applied to any other titratable drip such as sedation, or vasoactive/cardioactive drugs. I've seen this scenario play out with low-rate sedation when nurses first hook up their drip for an agitated patient. They use too many PRNs to bridge to IV sedation due to not seeing an adequate effect.  When the IV medication finally hits, the patient's mental status and pressure drops out. You'll want to know that if the onset of action for your sedation is 5 min, yet 15 min later the patient is very agitated, it's still appropriate to either increase your rate or give another PRN. That's only possible if the time it takes for sedation to initially reach your patient is minimal. That is what sets you up for good clinical judgement calls.

### The takeaway.

Nursing can be complicated and situation dependent, but following best practices ensures that more often than not, changing patient conditions are due to disease process rather than iatrogenic. I keep the examples above fresh in my head so that if I have a patient undergoing status changes, then as long as the total flow rate of my titratable drugs going into a single lumen (plus KVO if needed) exceeds about 10-20 ml/hr, I know I won't have to worry about delays. If I can't setup a KVO to increase flow rate (like with slower sedation) then I understand when it's either appropriate to use more PRNs to bridge or when it's ok to increase my sedation for more effect.
Not to mention with something like norepinephrine, running a KVO (10 ml/hr) alongside it (at 2 ml/hr) means that when I hopefully titrate it off and go to flush the catheter for another drip, the solution indwelling the catheter is essentially diluted by 80%. Voila! No more slamming systolic blood pressures to the mid 200's after an accidental flush. Just understand to follow your hospital policy on KVO orders.

Hope this illustration helps you think a little more critically in those moments of pucker-butt.
-J